add JAAS security doc (#62)
canonical/jaas-documentation: reference/security.rst

JAAS Security Overview
=======================

This document provides an overview of JAAS security measures, focusing on areas related to 
sensitive data storage, transmission, and cryptographic technologies.

Cloud Credentials
-----------------

> Cloud credentials are API keys used by Juju/JAAS to provision cloud infrastructure. 

Reviewer: JAAS doesn't provision anything? Isn't this kind of untrue?

Author: I think this is semantics, it's part of the process. Leaving as is.

These credentials are securely uploaded to and stored by JAAS. 

> When a model is created, the key is passed to the Juju controller to manage cloud resources.

Reviewer: This sentence could mean anything really, let's elaborate on:
`the key is passed to the Juju controller to manage cloud resources`

Elaborate on:
1. "The key is passed", what is the key and how is it passed. Without this context this sentence doesn't read well.
3. Create, manage and delete?

Author: The details of communication between JIMM and Juju controllers is covered separately. Leaving as is.

User-provided cloud credentials are stored securely in a `Vault <https://www.vaultproject.io/>`__, 

> a tool for managing secrets. Ensuring the secure handling of these credentials is essential 

Reviewer: We don't need the sentence: "Ensuring the secure...", you just said they're stored securely and now are saying "Ensuring..."

Author: The first sentence says that they are secured securely. The second sentence explains why they need to be secured safely.

to prevent unauthorised access or data breaches.

> Vault encrypts credentials at rest and provides mechanisms to prevent unauthorised access.

Reviewer: and provides its own authentication and authorisation?

Author: Yes but I think that's covered by "provides mechanisms to prevent unauthorised access".

JAAS - Juju Communication
--------------------------

JAAS acts as an authentication gateway between users and Juju controllers. 
Juju controllers trust JAAS by setting the ``login-token-refresh-url`` during bootstrap.
More information on setting up a Juju controller for JAAS can be found in our :doc:`how-to guide <../how-to/add_controller>`.

> Trust between Juju controllers and JAAS is established through asymmetric cryptography 

Reviewer: Asymmmetric cryptography, aren't most jwt sigs asymmetric?  Should this sentence read... through asymmetrically signed jwts?

Reviewer: What algo do we use again??? Might be good to put that here?

Author: JWTs can be signed using asymmetric or symmetric technology.
The algorithm is described lower down.

and `JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) <https://jwt.io/introduction>`__.

.. hint::
    While JWTs are also used for user sessions, the tokens exchanged between JAAS and Juju controllers are separate from user tokens.

The ``login-token-refresh-url`` points to a 
`JSON Web Key Set (JWKS) <https://auth0.com/docs/secure/tokens/json-web-tokens/json-web-key-sets>`__
endpoint, containing public keys used to verify tokens issued by JAAS.

> The public and private key pair are generated at startup and placed in Vault.

Reviewer: This is a json web key set, (JWKS), let's be explicit about what we're creating?  
Let's say this:

The JWKS, including the private key, are generated at startup and stored within Vault.

Author: Good point, will add.

> The keys are then periodically rotated.

Reviewer: Do we rotate the private key? I can't remember?

Author: I believe so. Will double check.

Author: Yes, it generates a new public and private key pair.

When JAAS makes requests to a Juju controller, a JWT is issued that encodes user information 
and permissions, securely delegating authentication and authorisation from the controller to JAAS.

Details:

- **JWKS Endpoint**: ``<jimm-url>/.well-known/jwks.json``
- **Key Type/Size**: RSA 4096 bits
- **Signing Algorithm**: RS256

The following Go packages are used:

- ``github.com/lestrrat-go/jwx/v2/jwa``
- ``github.com/lestrrat-go/jwx/v2/jwt``
- ``github.com/lestrrat-go/jwx/v2/jwk``

User Sessions
-------------

CLI-Based Sessions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> When authenticating the Juju CLI to JAAS, users go through an OAuth login flow, 

Reviewer: OAuth login flow via the device grant type*

> after which the CLI is issued a JWT session token. This token is stored on the 

Reviewer: The CLI is issued an application session token (JWT)

filesystem and sent with each request, eliminating the need for repeated logins.

While Juju controller tokens use asymmetric cryptography, session tokens for 

> users are signed using symmetric cryptography (i.e., a shared secret) with a 

Reviewer: Let's explain why its symmetric,

We use symmetric cryptography for application sessions as to prevent the user decoding the token (I know we only sign it, but we should encrypt it). Only JIMM needs to know the contents of the token.

Author: It's symmetric because only JIMM needs to **verify** it. I actually had that bit in before but removed it. Will add it back in.
As you said though, it's not encrypted, anyone can read the contents.

malicious account use.

The shared secret is generated by the JIMM charm operator using Juju secrets
and passed to the application.

Details:

- **Key Size**: >=512 bits
- **Signing Algorithm**: HMAC-SHA256

The following Go packages are used:

- ``github.com/gorilla/sessions``
- ``github.com/antonlindstrom/pgstore``

OIDC Authentication
-------------------

JAAS uses OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect (OIDC) for user authentication. 
You can learn more from this `overview <https://developer.okta.com/docs/concepts/oauth-openid/>`__.

The following Go packages are used:

- ``golang.org/x/oauth2``
- ``golang.org/x/oauth2/clientcredentials``
- ``github.com/coreos/go-oidc/v3/oidc``

Authorisation Code Flow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In a browser-based login, users follow the `authorisation code flow <https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/authorization-code-flow>`__.
Upon successful login, the access and refresh tokens are stored on the backend, 
and a session cookie is issued to the user's browser.

To protect against `CSRF attacks <https://auth0.com/docs/secure/attack-protection/state-parameters>`__,

> the backend issues a random nonce in the ``state`` parameter of the OAuth flow.

Reviewer: utilises the state parameter in the oauth authorisation code flow. (auth code grant, auth code + features = flow)

Device Code Flow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For CLI logins, the `device code flow <https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/device-authorization-flow>`__
is used, where the Juju CLI prompts the user to log in via a browser with a random code. The backend 

> stores access and refresh tokens, and the CLI receives a session token.

Reviewer: Application session token, be super explicit as to now confuse the user that we might be giving the refresh token away lol

> This process does not rely on browser redirects and is not susceptible to traditional browser vulnerabilities.

Reviewer: No need for this line

Author: I think it's useful to highlight why we don't have any extra security features like the "state" parameter. Leaving it in.

JAAS Security
=============

This document is an overview of JAAS specifically covering areas pertaining to security and/or sensitive data.

In each section we explain how the information is stored/transmitted and any cryptographic
technologies used.

Cloud-Credentials
-----------------

Cloud-credentials are the API keys Juju/JAAS needs in order to provision cloud infrastructure.

> These keys are uploaded to and stored by JAAS. Whenever a a model is created, the key is uploaded to 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These keys are uploaded to and stored by JAAS. Whenever a model is created, the key is uploaded to 
```

the Juju controller and used to manage cloud resources.

> User provided cloud credentials are stored securely and safely within a secret `vault <https://www.vaultproject.io/>`__. 

Reviewer 3: Maybe "vault" should be Capitalized?

> It is  essential to handle these secrets securely to prevent unauthorised access and data breaches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is essential to handle these secrets securely to prevent unauthorised access and data breaches
```

to the user's cloud.

The use of Vault ensures that credentials are encrypted at rest and provides tools to avoid unauthorised
access.

JAAS - Juju Communication
--------------------------

JAAS acts as a central auth gateway between users and Juju controllers.

> Juju controllers explicitly trust JAAS by setting the ``login-token-refresh-url`` at bootstrap

Reviewer 3: ...\`\`login-token-refresh-url\`\` option at...

time. See our :doc:`how-to <../how-to/add_controller>` for more info on how to setup a new
Juju controller for JAAS.

Trust between Juju controllers and JAAS is established through the use of asymmetric cryptography
and `JSON Web Tokens <https://jwt.io/introduction>`__ (JWT). 

.. hint::

    To avoid confusion, note that JWTs are also used elsewhere in JAAS particularly in user sessions. 
    Although solving a similar problem, the tokens used between JAAS and Juju and those issued to users
    are two separate systems.

The ``login-token-refresh-url`` config option points to a
`JSON Web Key Set <https://auth0.com/docs/secure/tokens/json-web-tokens/json-web-key-sets>`__ 
(JWKS) endpoint. This endpoint contains a set of public keys used to verify the authenticy of tokens
issued by JAAS.

Whenever a request is made by JAAS to a Juju controller, a JWT is issued that encodes the user's
information and permissions. This mechanism allows the authorisation and authentication to be securely
delegated from the Juju controller to JAAS.

Specific details are below:

- **JWKS endpoint:** ``<jimm-url>/.well-known/jwks.json``
- **Key Type/Size:** RSA 4096 bits

> - **Signing Algorithm:** RS256

Reviewer 3: For consistency:

s/Type/type
s/Size/size
s/Algorithm/algorithm

Author: Opted to keep them as all caps

> The following Go packages are used to create the JWKS and JWTs.

Reviewer 3: Maybe end with a colon?

- ``github.com.com/lestrrat-go/jwx/v2/jwa>``
- ``github.com/lestrrat-go/jwx/v2/jwt>``

> - ``github.com/lestrrat-go/jwx/v2/jwk>``

Reviewer 3: Please delete the trailing `>`s.

User Sessions
-------------

CLI Based Sessions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When authenticating the Juju CLI to JAAS the user goes through an OAuth login flow (see `Device Code Flow`_).

> After login, the CLI is issued a JWT i.e. a session token. This avoids making the user login repeatedly.

Reviewer 3: Maybe a comma before "i.e."?

.. hint::
  These JWTs use the same technology as the tokens used in communications between JAAS and Juju controllers but
  they are not the same tokens.

The session token is eventually stored on the file-system and sent on each request.

Whereas the tokens issued to Juju controllers use asymmetric cryptography, tokens issued to users are signed with

> symmetric cryptography. Session tokens are signed using a cryptographic hash function and a shared secret. 

Reviewer 3: Technically we're not signing the tokens with a symmetric algorithm. We just encrypt them.

Author: This has been reworded but what do you mean by this?

Author: The JWT session token we provide to users is signed, and contains the email, which is visible if you put the token into a JWT decoder.

Since there is no need for external parties to verify sessions, only JAAS, who holds the shared secret can verify
the session token. 

Note that the JWT contains the user's email and should be secured to avoid a a possible leak of personal information
(in addition to possible malicious use of an account).

> Specific details are below:

Reviewer 2: i would add where the shared secret is stored.
I would imagine the juju controller to store it hashed on the controller's host, what about jaas?

Author: Good idea

- **Key Size:** >=512 bits

> - **Signing Algorithm:** HS256

Reviewer 3: Maybe the same changes.

The following Go packages are used for creating JWTs:

- ``github.com/lestrrat-go/jwx/v2/jwt>``

> - ``github.com/lestrrat-go/jwx/v2/jwa>``

Reviewer 3: Please remove the trailing `>`s.

Browser Cookies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When using JAAS from the Juju dashboard, a different type of session is created. In this scenario cookies are

> used as browsers offer better built in support for cookies.

Reviewer 3: s/built in/built-in

> After login is completed, the browser is issued with a session cookie. The cookie's stores a cryptographically

Reviewer 3: s/cookie's/cookie

encoded value that allows the server to retrieve the session data.

Specific details are below:

- **Key Size:** >=512 bits

> - **Signing Algorithm:** ``HMAC-SHA256`` (the same as HS256 but HS256 is normally used in the context of JWTs)

Reviewer 3: Same comment.

Note that the browser session cookie does not contain any information beyond an encoded session ID that is
used to lookup the user information. This is in contrast with the CLI session token which contains the user's email.

The following Go libraries are used to handle browser sessions:

- `<github.com/gorilla/sessions>`__
- `<github.com/antonlindstrom/pgstore>`__

OIDC Authentication
-------------------

JAAS employs OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect (OIDC) for user authentication, 
see `here <https://developer.okta.com/docs/concepts/oauth-openid/>`__
for an overview on these concepts.

Below we outline the various login flows used in JAAS.

The following Go packages are used to implement this functionality:

- `<golang.org/x/oauth2>`__
- `<golang.org/x/oauth2/clientcredentials>`__
- `<github.com/coreos/go-oidc/v3/oidc>`__

Authorisation Code Flow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When performing login via a browser, users go through the authorisation code flow.

> This is best described by various diagrams such as 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is best described by this diagram
```

`this <https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/authorization-code-flow>`__.

In this flow the user's browser is redirected to the identity provider where they are
asked to login before being redirected back to the original application.

> Because JAAS is a server side app, the access token and refresh token are stored

Reviewer 3: s/server side/server-side

1. Request from JAAS a URL and random code which the user can use to login.
2. The CLI will then wait for a response from JAAS.
3. JAAS polls the identity server, which in turn is waiting for the user to complete their login.

A diagram depicting this login flow can be found 
`here <https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/authorization-code-flow>`__.

This process does not rely on browser redirects and so is not susceptible to traditional browser vulnerabilities.
Both the access token and refresh token are obtained and stored by the back-end server
and the CLI application is issued with a session token as described in `CLI Based Sessions`_.

Client Credential Flow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When there is a need to perform login by a machine rather than a physical user, OAuth handles this through
the use of a client credential flow.

A diagram depicting this login flow can be found 
`here <https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/client-credentials-flow>`__.

This process is reserved for scenarios where machine to machine authentication is required. A good example

> of this is includes the use of the Juju Terraform Provider where the client-credential flow is employed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is when Juju Terraform Provider authenticates on JAAS.
```

In the link above, the client application communicates with the identity provider to retrieve an access token
that is then used with the API server. This design is shifted in JAAS. The client application instead sends
its application credentials to JAAS which then forwards the information to the identity provider. JAAS
effectively acts as a proxy between the client application and the identity provider.

This scheme simplifies authentication for client applications but is only possible since JAAS is a trusted
application in the system.

Macaroons & Offer Authentication
--------------------------------

Macaroons are a tool for decentralised authentication similar to JSON Web Tokens.
The `Go Macaroon package <https://pkg.go.dev/gopkg.in/macaroon.v2@v2.1.0>`__ is used by JAAS and has more
details on the low-level operations that Macaroons are capable of.

Macaroons are used by Juju for various purposes but in JAAS their primary purpose is for authorising 

> cross-model relations between controllers. When two Juju controllers (that are connected to JAAS) 

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this be cross-controller?

Author: Technically they're still called cross-model relations, they just happen to be done across two controllers.

communicate for the purposes of sharing an application offer, JAAS acts as the source of truth for 
authorisation data. These checks are handled using macaroons.

Macaroons use a combination of HMAC for cryptographic signatures and symmetric encryption to encode
the scope (or caveats) of what a macaroon is entitled to.

These operations are performed using ``HMAC-SHA256`` and ``XSalsa20-Poly1305``. The following Go 
packages are used by the underlying macaroon package for these operations:

- ``crypto/hmac``

> - ``crypto/sha256``

Reviewer 3: **suggestion:** For a Go-unfamiliar reader, maybe it's better to remark that these two are standard library packages. What do you think?

- ``golang.org/x/crypto/nacl/secretbox``

Additionally, the higher-level `Macaroon Bakery package <https://github.com/go-macaroon-bakery/macaroon-bakery>`__
is used to interface with macaroons and introduces public key cryptography to perform similar operations
as mentioned above. This allows services to trust macaroons generated externally.

These operations are performed using ``Ed25519`` and ``XSalsa20-Poly1305``. The following Go packages are 
used by the underlying macaroon bakery package for these operations:

- ``golang.org/x/crypto/nacl/box``
- ``golang.org/x/crypto/curve25519``

When a Juju controller is connected to JAAS, the ``login-token-refresh-url`` is used to determine where 
the JAAS macaroon public key is located. This public key is used when Juju controllers issue macaroons 

> and enforces that the macaroon can only be  discharged by JAAS, who holds the private key. Discharging 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and enforces that the macaroon can only be discharged by JAAS, who holds the private key. Discharging 
```

a macaroon refers to the process of verifying its claims.

Specific details are below:

- **Macaroon Public Key endpoint:** ``<jimm-url>/macaroons/publickey``
- **Key Type:** Ed25519 (256-bit key)

> - **Signing algorithm:** Ed25519

Reviewer 3: The same comment.

TLS Communication
-----------------

In this section we will cover the use of TLS between components of JAAS.

TLS encryption is handled by the Go standard library packages:

- ``crypto/tls``
- ``crypto/x509``

Client - JAAS
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Juju client package enforces the use of TLS when connecting to a controller.
This extends to both the Juju CLI and the Juju Terraform Provider.

> The minimum supported version is TLS v1.2

Reviewer 3: Needs a full stop.

JAAS - Juju Controllers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

JAAS enforces the use of TLS when connecting to a Juju controller.

> The minimum supported version is TLS v1.2

Reviewer 3: The same.

JAAS - OpenFGA
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

JAAS does not currently enforce TLS when communicating with OpenFGA.

TLS is not currently supported with the OpenFGA charm operator.

JAAS - Vault
^^^^^^^^^^^^

JAAS assumes that Vault is reachable with TLS but does not enforce this.
By default the Vault charm employs the use of TLS.

The minimum supported version is TLS v1.2.

JAAS - PostgreSQL
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

JAAS does not currently enforce TLS when communicating with PostgreSQL.

> But this can be achieved when using the PostgreSQL charm.

Reviewer 2: I would put this differently. 
It is possible to achieve TLS by using the PostgresSQL charm and configure it properly by following https://charmhub.io/postgresql-k8s/docs/t-enable-tls

The minimum supported version is TLS v1.2.

CORS
----

CORS or Cross-Origin Resource Sharing is a browser security feature designed to prevent
malicious use of your online credentials. Read more on CORS 
`here <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS#what_requests_use_cors>`__.

> JAAS supports the use of CORS headers specifically for the purposes of the Juju

Reviewer 2: Do we want to add that CORS is not supported for WS communications?

Author: Yes I'll need to mention that.

dashboard. The dashboard requires the ability to send cross-origin requests from the domain
where it is hosted to the domain where JAAS is hosted. More information on how to setup

> CORS to securely handle these requests will be available in a future how-to.

Reviewer 3: Maybe add a `TODO` marker so that we won't miss updating this link.

Authorisation Code Flow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In a browser-based login, users follow the `authorisation code flow <https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/authorization-code-flow>`__.
Upon successful login, the access and refresh tokens are stored on the backend, 
and a session cookie is issued to the user's browser.

To protect against `CSRF attacks <https://auth0.com/docs/secure/attack-protection/state-parameters>`__,
the backend issues a random nonce in the ``state`` parameter of the OAuth flow.

Device Code Flow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For CLI logins, the `device code flow <https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/device-authorization-flow>`__

> is used, where the Juju CLI prompts the user to log in via a browser. The backend stores access 

Reviewer 3: I think we should also mention the random code (like as you did before).

Author: Added that bit back

and refresh tokens, and the CLI receives a session token.

This process does not rely on browser redirects and so is not susceptible to traditional browser vulnerabilities.

Client Credential Flow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For machine-to-machine authentication, the 
`client credentials flow <https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/client-credentials-flow>`__

> is used. However, in JAAS, the client application sends its credentials to JAAS, which proxies them to the identity provider.

Reviewer 3: And the Juju Terraform Provider, as an example, was a good thing.

Author: Added.
